learning-design-plan-1.md, before:

# Learning Design for Teaching in a Tertiary Context
## Assessment Task 1: The Learning Design Plan

### Part 1: The learning design context and background

#### a. Introduction
This plan is for the redevelopment of *Professional Practice for Information Technology*, a level 5 course that is delivered to all first-year Bachelor of Information Technology students. The current version of the course was developed as a traditional communications theory course and consisted of lecture-style sessions with some blended learning in the form of online quizzes, with traditional assessments such as essays, formal reports and exams.

This plan aims to modernise the course by introducing learning strategies such as experiential learning, using professional portfolios for assessment and introducing more peer feedback and formative assessment. This design approach is appropriate in the context of this course and its containing programme because it reflects aspects of the collaborative workflows found in the IT industry as well as introducing students to performance criteria they will encounter later in the degree as well as in the workplace.

#### b. Background and context
The previous lecturer of this course developed as a lecture-style, largely theoretical course which was delivered by PowerPoint presentations. The learning environment was a semi-traditional setting, with rows of seats facing the front whiteboard and projector screen but with a bench around the periphery of the room for lab computers. The course was considered to be a "soft skills" paper in a technically-focussed degree programme, which all agree is necessary but was nonetheless often considered less relevant than more technical courses.

While the course was focussed on communication and group work theory, there were very few truly collaborative activities beyond class discussion. Class activities were often based around exercises found in the prescribed text books. More recent delivery modes introduced blended learning in the form of online forums for writing practice and basic practice with industry tools such as GitHub. Some classroom collaboration was also brought in by encouraging groups to research some of the theory material and present back to the class, which was an effective way to reduce the need for lecture-style presentations by the teacher.

As the course descriptor had not been changed, the focus was still on communications theory and academic writing. While these are still relevant to IT students, a shift in content focus and the adoption of more modern learning design will better meet the needs of future students and industry stakeholders. 

Firstly, despite varying ethnic and social backgrounds (and despite the IT industry being highly internationalised), the majority of IT students share a set of cultural features often common to people with an interest in computing. The culture of IT students is different enough from a more general set of norms, beliefs and behaviours amongst the student population that a new learning design must take IT culture into account. As such, the focus on communication and collaboration should still remain at the forefront of the learning design, but, as per recent trends in wider tertiary education, the mode of delivery needs to shift from highly theoretical to being much more practical and experiential. Employers will also benefit from students who have had plenty of practice working in a workplace-like context and using professional workflows and collaboration tools.

#### c. Aim and objectives

#### d. Milestones/deliverables

#### e. Stakeholders and analysis of learners

Commit message:

Add mention of quality drivers

learning-design-plan-1.md, after:

# Learning Design for Teaching in a Tertiary Context
## Assessment Task 1: The Learning Design Plan

### Part 1: The learning design context and background

#### a. Introduction
This plan is for the redevelopment of *Professional Practice for Information Technology*, a level 5 course that is delivered to all first-year Bachelor of Information Technology students. The current version of the course was developed as a traditional communications theory course and consisted of lecture-style sessions with some blended learning in the form of online quizzes, with traditional assessments such as essays, formal reports and exams.

This plan aims to modernise the course by introducing learning strategies such as experiential learning, using professional portfolios for assessment and introducing more peer feedback and formative assessment. This design approach is appropriate in the context of this course and its containing programme because it reflects aspects of the collaborative workflows found in the IT industry as well as introducing students to performance criteria they will encounter later in the degree as well as in the workplace.

#### b. Background and context
The previous lecturer of this course developed as a lecture-style, largely theoretical course which was delivered by PowerPoint presentations. The learning environment was a semi-traditional setting, with rows of seats facing the front whiteboard and projector screen but with a bench around the periphery of the room for lab computers. The course was considered to be a "soft skills" paper in a technically-focussed degree programme, which all agree is necessary but was nonetheless often considered less relevant than more technical courses.

While the course was focussed on communication and group work theory, there were very few truly collaborative activities beyond class discussion. Class activities were often based around exercises found in the prescribed text books. More recent delivery modes introduced blended learning in the form of online forums for writing practice and basic practice with industry tools such as GitHub. Some classroom collaboration was also brought in by encouraging groups to research some of the theory material and present back to the class, which was an effective way to reduce the need for lecture-style presentations by the teacher.

As the course descriptor had not been changed, the focus was still on communications theory and academic writing. While these are still relevant to IT students, a shift in content focus and the adoption of more modern learning design will better meet the needs of future students and industry stakeholders. 

Despite varying ethnic and social backgrounds (and despite the IT industry being highly internationalised), the majority of IT students share a set of cultural features often common to people with an interest in computing. The culture of IT students is different enough from a more general set of norms, beliefs and behaviours amongst the student population that a new learning design must take IT culture into account (to be discussed further in section e). As such, the focus on communication and collaboration should still remain at the forefront of the learning design, but, as per recent trends in wider tertiary education, the mode of delivery needs to shift from highly theoretical to being much more practical and experiential. Employers will also benefit from students who have had plenty of practice working in a workplace-like context and using professional workflows and collaboration tools, and will be better placed to meet quality drivers in both the education and industry contexts.

#### c. Aim and objectives

#### d. Milestones/deliverables

#### e. Stakeholders and analysis of learners
