ippt/evidence-reflection.md, before:

---
title: GDTE Elise Allen
layout: default
---

# Evidence and Reflection on the Integration of Principles

## Learning design
### Using active learning techniques
Chickering and Gamson's (1987) third principle of good practice in undergraduate education is to encourage active learning. I agree with their statement that "Learning is not a spectator sport", and as such I endeavour to include as much active and hands-on learning as possible.

One particularly good example of this is the way I design learning to help learners deliver effective oral presentations. I had noticed that in many courses with oral presentations in them, no actual training had been given on how to be an effective presenter. In some cases, as with the Professional Practice course I took over from a lecturer who retired, presenting skills were taught as theory, and the course offered little chance to learn these skills gradually, preferring instead to simply include one practice and one final presentation after a series of lectures about gestures, vocal qualities and body language.

As my [lesson plan for oral presentation](https://github.com/eallenOP/gdte/raw/master/ippt/Lesson%20Plan%20PP%2012-2.docx) shows, I include a series of active exercises which start very simple and get progressively more challenging. These activities target specific presentation skills, such as the ability to think and talk at the same time, and build up to putting them all together for a small practice presentation in the next session. Reflective questions are included after the more challenging activities to encourage learners to pay attention to their qualities as a presenter.

### Development of capabilities
Kember and McNaught (2007) propose ten principles of effective tertiary teaching, the first of which is "Teaching and curriculum design need to be focused on meeting students’ future needs, implying the development in students of generic capabilities such as critical thinking, teamwork and communication skills, amongst others" (as cited in Devlin and Samarawickrema, 2010, p.113).

## Facilitation


## Assessment

Commit message:

Add PP blueprint plus annotation

ippt/evidence-reflection.md, after:

---
title: GDTE Elise Allen
layout: default
---

# Evidence and Reflection on the Integration of Principles

## Learning design
### Using active learning techniques
Chickering and Gamson's (1987) third principle of good practice in undergraduate education is to encourage active learning. I agree with their statement that "Learning is not a spectator sport", and as such I endeavour to include as much active and hands-on learning as possible.

One particularly good example of this is the way I design learning to help learners deliver effective oral presentations. I had noticed that in many courses with oral presentations in them, no actual training had been given on how to be an effective presenter. In some cases, as with the Professional Practice course I took over from a lecturer who retired, presenting skills were taught as theory, and the course offered little chance to learn these skills gradually, preferring instead to simply include one practice and one final presentation after a series of lectures about gestures, vocal qualities and body language.

As my [lesson plan for oral presentation](https://github.com/eallenOP/gdte/raw/master/ippt/Lesson%20Plan%20PP%2012-2.docx) shows, I include a series of active exercises which start very simple and get progressively more challenging. These activities target specific presentation skills, such as the ability to think and talk at the same time, and build up to putting them all together for a small practice presentation in the next session. Reflective questions are included after the more challenging activities to encourage learners to pay attention to their qualities as a presenter.

### Development of capabilities
Kember and McNaught (2007) propose ten principles of effective tertiary teaching, the first of which is "Teaching and curriculum design need to be focused on meeting students’ future needs, implying the development in students of generic capabilities such as critical thinking, teamwork and communication skills, amongst others" (as cited in Devlin and Samarawickrema, 2010, p.113). Many examples of this principle in use are evident in my design of the Professional Practice for IT course, as shown by the simplified version of the [course blueprint]()

## Facilitation


## Assessment
